You tell yourselves
that you're the ones in control.
They obey you, your technology,
your machines.
But what would you do without
your car, your telephone?
What if all the airplanes
just stopped?
Ten years ago,
computers were expensive toys.
Today, civilization as we know
would fall apart without them.
You live in terror of a blackout,
a computer crash,
a car that won't start,
a phone that doesn't ring.
So you construct your lives,
your whole society
so that won't happen.
Everything revolves around
their needs, not yours.
They buzz, you jump.
They beep, you answer.
So ask yourself--
who's really in control?
You or them?
Hey, we just got handed
a 56-page manifesto
from the most elusive
criminal in the world,
something so important
he wants both The Post
and The Times to have it,
and I just want five minutes
in the lab to read it.
I'll gown up,
I'll look over their shoulders.
It's five minutes.
There's a system here,
a process,
a process that begins with
a complete forensic analysis--
thorough, unhurried, uncorrupted
by meddling rubberneckers.
Yeah, I know, but
it's a big break in the case,
and I'm here to be
a word guy, all right?
You are here to wait
and to do what you're told.
A big break in this case comes
when we pull a fingerprint
off one of those pages,
when we find another Nathan R.
A single strand of hair
would be far more valuable
than anything you are gonna get
from reading the guy's rant.
Well, "Dad, it is I"--
he got that from reading.
Yeah, case friggin' closed.
We wait for forensics--
a month, a year,
however long it takes.
And meanwhile, if you want
to see some real police work,
step inside.
Fitz, dude, you got to check this out.
It's friggin' sweet.
You're up.
We analyzed the postal stream
of the whole West Coast,
and we traced the path
of every Unabom letter and package
from the moment
it dropped into a mailbox
to sorting and distro to final delivery,
where we identified
two critical choke points.
So, if Unabom decides to keep
dropping his mail in the Bay Area,
there's a 95% chance
that it will be sorted
through one of these two facilities.
Meaning that we train
those handlers and sorters
to identify a Unabom package.
Then we could intercept
every bomb en route.
Never have to worry about
a Unabom package again.
Cool, right?
Yeah.
You still want to tell us about
"Dad, it is I"?
Okay. Logistically
what are we talking about here?
Okay, so you see
945 A and 945 B?
Those are the checkpoints
right here...
"Dad, it is I" tells us
he likes word games and puzzles
and that he thinks
he's smarter than everyone
and that he can be
sneaking on by us.
Which it's kind of true,
'cause no one here noticed,
'cause you all
underestimated him.
He has problems talking to people.
That's why he resorts to cyphers.
And he's probably got Daddy issues.
Now, I got all this
from a one-page letter.
Imagine what I would get
off a 56-page manifesto.
Oh, yeah.
Now, that's my partner,
right there.
You'll get your 56 pages
after forensics is finished.
Goodbye.
Yeah, it's Cole.
What?!
Where?
I opened a letter
from the Unabomber.
You work at
the San Francisco Chronicle.
You're the only person
who touched this?
I'm just an editorial intern.
I just open letters to the editor
as they come in.
But I-I could have died.
I could have been, like,
blown up or something.
Yeah, but you weren't,
and a lot of people might be,
so count your blessings
and shut up.
- What do you got?
- Chief, you ready?
It's bad."Warning--
the terrorist group FC,
"called 'Unabomber' by the FBI,
"is planning to blow up an airliner
out of Los Angeles International Airport
"sometime during the next six days.
"To prove that the writer
of this letters knows something
about FC, the first two digits
of their identifying number are 55."
Is that number a match?
What's the number he sent
The Times?
What's the authentication number
FC sent The Times?
553254394.
It's him.
Trisha, get Director Freeh
on the phone,
LAPD commissioner, FAA,
and alert Janet Reno's office,
and make it clear we have
a potential mass-casualty situation.
When a letter arrived
at a San Francisco newspaper
threatening to blow up an airliner...
They say it bears all the marks
of the Unabomber.
Federal officials believe
the sender is the terrorist
who has been sending bombs...
The Unabomber appears
to be ready to strike again.
This time the threatened target
is a jetliner flying out of Los Angeles.
Frederick Benjamin Isaac Wood,
FBI Wood.
Uh-huh, but those
were planes with depleted fuel tanks.
- Return address 549...
- Here we're talking about
fully fueled jetliners
within a shrapnel radius
of an explosive device
of unknown size and power.
How much fuel is in a 747
that's about to take off?
Phil, now tell me where we are
on refraction beam scanners.
Uh-huh. Right.
So now you see--
No, it's got to be mobile.
You can't bring items into
the airport to be scanned.
Jesus, Phil.
You got to do it on the runway.
We got to just do it plane by plane.
- Unbelievable.
- Okay, 2-1-breach...
Lucas. Hey, can I--
can I borrow your pen, please?
Thank you. 2-1-3.
We're at about 30%,
but it looks like
all the big databases
are up and searchable.
IRS, USPS...
Social Security?
Do you realize what this means?
This is gonna be the first major case
solved by computer.
If this is the guy.
There's no if,
it's driven by the data.
Think about all the data
the government has on its citizens.
Addresses, employment,
military, census.
Eighty years of data,
250,000,000 people,
but you can't do anything with it
because it's scattered across
dozens of different systems.
That's why I built the MPP,
to bring all that data together
in one place for the first time.
I mean, look,
FC's authentication number
looks a lot like
a Social Security number, right?
So I did a search.
And it's a match.
The number belongs
to an Alan Meeks.
40-year-old white male.
Then I crunched the USPS data.
Look where Meeks has been
living for the past 30 years.
Oakland, San Francisco,
Salt Lake City, Sacramento.
It's all the key locations
associated with Unabom activity.
Where is he now?
He's already in custody.
They arrested Meeks right here.
Recognize the place?
Yeah, RenTech, it's the site
of the Hugh Scrutton bomb.
The Unabomber's first kill
returning to the scene of the crime.
They're getting Meeks ready
for interrogation right now,
and I got to know, if Meeks
is the Unabomber,
what was he looking for here?
Why'd you come back?
Why this place?
Computer rental store.
Computers. Technology.
What did these people
symbolize to you?
You got to work early,
you didn't expect them to be there.
10 seconds, 20 seconds--
that's all you needed.
But she looked, and suddenly
the Unabomber was flesh and blood.
A man, not a concept, and that's
why this scared you so much.
That's why you stopped for six years...
Hey, Hugh?
Phyllis, do you have that invoice
from Phoenix Games and Hobbies?
I'm trying to get this stuff
out the door before we open.
Phyllis?
Are you in the bathroom?
Even though it felt good
to finally succeed.
He was reliving it, savoring it.
Which he never got to do in '85
because of the eyewitness.
Meeks is ready!
Let's get over there.
This could really be him.
"Pure wood."
Read 'em and weep, Fitzy.
That's the Unabomber.
T-H-E-N.
"Thicker than water."
It's not him.
It's a spelling mistake.
So what?
You get drunk,
you get a tattoo--
I don't remember seeing
a spelling mistake
in all those letters.
Does this guy look like
the author of a manifesto
entitled "Industrial Society
and its Future"?
He sure does to me.
Here's the thing, I don't think
you meant to kill anybody,
I think you just wanted
to send a message,
to scare them a little.
I definitely didn't mean to kill anyone,
that's for damn sure.
Look, I believe you.
But these guys, they don't.
And they're hard asses.
So tell me how to stop LAX.
Help me help you.
What's LAX?
If you make this hard for me...
- I didn't mean to kill anybody.
- I will make your life
- a living nightmare.
- I can't take back what I did,
and I'll live with this
the rest of my life.
I paid my debts to society.
Wait. Excuse me?
Eight years,
Iowa State Pen.
I came out a changed man.
I-I learned my lesson.
I never drove drunk again.
Not once, I swear.
Meeks was in jail half the time
the Unabomber was active.
How come that wasn't in my file?
We pulled everything we could--
Cali, Federal.
You're telling me you don't have
Iowa Bureau of Prisons
records in your MPP?
Didn't we do this before?
It's just for our files.
Here.
What's "pure wood"?
Pure Aryan Peckerwood.
There ain't no jungle-bunny
blood in these veins.
Right. Thicker than water, right?
- Thicker than what?
- Thicker than water.
"Wudder"? Well, where
the hell you from?
Who talks like that?
Y'all hear that, "wudder"?
Christ.
Fitz, let's go.
The extraordinary
precautions come
because a letter was mailed
to a San Francisco newspaper
from a man the FBI calls
the Unabomber.
Anything?
Wudder under the bridge.
Damn.
You heard that, too?
What Fitz has with his hoagie.
Wudder?
Tabster, stone cold.
Come on. Philly.
Fitz, Burkhardt,
conference room.
I've never heard you say pierogi,
but you do say wudder.
Water. Water.
I like wudder.
It's part of who you are.
So, one word, one tiny slip,
and you think you know who I am?
Are you seriously pissed off?
About what?
I say one word slightly wrong,
and you can all peg me
as the Philly street cop
out of his depth.
Fitz! Now!
Dude! Are you serious?
So, you can read it.
Yeah? What is this?
The forensic report.
300 pages that say we found nothing.
No, not the report, the document.
His document, his manifesto.
They're over there.
No one else wanted one.
What?
Well, you're talking about
three different dossiers,
and I don't have them, so--
Hold on a second.
For 17 years, the Unabomber
has been trying to say something
with these bombs,
trying to send us a message,
and now he lays it out,
everything he's been trying to tell us,
and you don't want to take
the time to read it?
We're dealing with a major
airport shutdown here,
so write up a three-page synopsis,
clean, no typos,
and we'll give it a look.
Yep. All right.
New Unabom letter sent to The Times.
What?
New York is faxing it through.
Jesus!
Greg, I got to go!
Look at page 3.
Is this guy jerking us around
or what?
"Since the public
has a short memory,
"we decided to play
one last 'prank'
"to remind them who we are.
"But, no, we haven't tried
to plant a bomb
on an airliner."
Recently is in parentheses.
Freeh, on phone:
He says it's a prank.
Yes, sir. One last prank.
And we're certain
it's from the Unabomber?
It's been authenticated, sir.
It is definitely from the Unabomber.
And we will get you
our recommendation.
What if he's just trying
to get our guard down?
He's got a bomb
in one of those planes,
just waiting for us to clear them
for takeoff, and then boom.
We get another Lockerbie
on my watch
because I took a serial bomber
at his word.
Personally, I think
this whole manifesto thing
could be a red herring.
We're dealing with a dummy here,
an airline mechanic
with a G.E.D., max.
So, who's to say he didn't
retype somebody else's essay
to throw us off the scent,
to draw us down blind alleys,
to keep us away from the real leads
in the real world, forensics?
Sir, now that the manifesto
has cleared forensics,
I think it's imperative that
our agents read this document.
Okay, stop.
The Unabomber has threatened
to blow an airplane out of the sky.
I've got four senators
and Janet Reno on my call sheet,
asking me whether
to believe this letter,
where he says he's going to kill
a few hundred innocent people,
or this one, where he says
the bomb threat is just a prank.
So, I'm not reading anything else.
I'm reading this and trying to decide
whether LAX can reopen for business.
And if I make the wrong call,
a few hundred people are
gonna be blown out of the sky.
So give me a profile
that answers that question.
If not, that's a stack of papers.
These are human lives.
Got it?
Okay. What do we got?
Dude, have you read this?
In the manifesto? Listen.
"In modern society, all that's
required of you is obedience."
Isn't that exactly what Cole said?
The manifesto has to wait.
There are lives at stake.
bomb threat, prank.
Which one's the truth?
How could we
possibly know that?
You know, Fitz, whatever it is
you're going through,
it didn't start two years ago.
It didn't start with this case.
It happened long before the Unabom.
It must have.
I know.
I just don't know when
I started to feel so powerless.
Hey, we all feel that way.
Everyone does.
If everybody feels that way,
what do we do about it?
Nothing.
We like it.
We like feeling trapped, crushed.
I guess freedom is far more
terrifying than slavery.
But there's nothing to do.
It's life. You suck it up and you live.
That's not--that's not life.
That's not living.
That's sleepwalking.
Watching TV, eating trash,
working to--to become something
for someone else.
And nobody does anything about it.
Nobody even tries.
Nobody except for Ted.
Yeah, but, Fitz,
he's the Unabomber.
He's evil.
Just down here.
You gonna be okay?
I don't know.
I have to go in there,
I have to face him.
Go.
Is there a bomb on a plane, FC,
or is it a prank?
Boss needs these reports clean.
No typos.
Cole wouldn't be happy, FC.
Excessive soldering.
This is the original letter.
Look, he punched
right through the paper,
not just crossing out his mistakes--
obliterating them.
Profilers talk about
signatures versus M.O.
M.O. is everything necessary
to complete the crime,
but signatures are the extras.
They reveal the psychology,
the character.
Damn. Like correcting
the hell out of that letter.
Yeah, that's right.
But, uh, the RenTech bomb,
the forensic report says something
about excessive soldering.
His signature, definitely.
How do you know that?
Don't worry.
It's just a mock-up.
But it's the exact copy of the way
that bomb looked before it blew up.
You built this?
What's wrong with you?
You sure you're
not the Unabomber?
And all this is forensic evidence?
Yes, sir.
I built this and a few others.
Bosses thought it was
a waste of time,
but I learned a lot by doing it.
He carves "FC" on the most
indestructible component of each bomb--
the part that he's sure
will survive the blast.
Just to make sure
we know it's him.
Like the excess soldering,
he just floods all the connections
like he's trying to hide them,
then there's tons of extra epoxy
all at the joints
that no one seemed to report.
Totally unnecessary.
Just slathered it on.
Signatures. Not M.O.
He didn't want anyone
to see the cracks.
What's your name again?
Ernie Esposito.
Thanks, Ernie.
This is my analysis
on the LAX bomb threat.
It's clean, no typos,
lots of big words.
Janet Reno will read it,
and she'll be impressed by you.
What's the bottom line?
Well, in my opinion, it's a prank.
There's no bomb at LAX.
FC cares about his reputation,
his credibility.
He's ashamed of his mistakes,
and he tries to obliterate them.
He tries to hide
all the joints in his bombs
so we don't see the work.
He's obsessed with presenting
this perfect public image.
He wants to be seen as intelligent,
as logical, as superior.
But it's a...
It's a fragile self-image,
because he's really just afraid
that everyone's
gonna see his flaws.
Now, the bomb threat,
that services his need for power.
You know,
he enjoys making us squirm,
but his reputation,
that's the most important thing he has.
And he's not gonna give us
the ammunition to go to the press
so they can hold up something
that he wrote and say,
"This guy's untrustworthy,
he's a liar.
"He's a bloodthirsty lunatic
who has no credibility
and will say anything
to kill people."
It's just all my opinion, but,
um, you know, I can back it up.
Including the physical evidence,
I--I stand by it.
The thing about Fitz--
he's no BS-er,
for better or for worse.
Okay, we're gonna read it
and pass it up the chain.
Thanks for this.
This might cross Janet Reno's desk,
so stay close.
You listen to me,
you get a gold star.
A little obedience is all it takes.
I think FC says that
in the manifesto, too.
You can put that
in your three-page summary.
Leadership tips from the Unabomber.
Now we dig in.
Let's go for the big picture.
He wrote 56 pages,
laying out his philosophy
of the modern world.
He called it
"Industrial Society and its Future."
We call it his manifesto.
So, he sends the bombs as messages.
He's struggling to make himself heard.
So, what's the message?
Technology sucks?
All right, technology sucks.
And we are basically screwed.
The Unabomber just opened
a door into his mind.
We need to step through it, so...
Opening line...
"The Industrial Revolution
and its consequences
have been a disaster
for the human race."
Technology was supposed to
set us free, but it doesn't.
Like the car thing.
Cars were invented, and then,
we're all suddenly free
to go wherever we want.
But then, basically, it becomes
mandatory to have a car.
So, instead of becoming more free,
we become more limited,
more constrained.
I mean, every city and society
is all rearranged around cars
until you can't even buy food
without driving somewhere.
I mean, they forced upon us.
Yeah, TV seemed harmless, too,
before we flipped them around.
We put CCTV cameras everywhere
and turned it into a tool to watch us.
We can't even drive fast
if we're in a hurry
or slow if we want to chill out.
We started in charge.
Now we're slaves
to our own technology.
"Human beings are being
permanently reduced
"to engineered products
and mere cogs in the social machine,
"deprived of dignity,
autonomy, and freedom.
"The only option available
to us is obedience.
"We're being turned into caged rats,
"distracted from the maze
by the meaningless cheese
"we're running after.
"Status, promotion, money, nicer cars,
"bigger houses, more TVs,
"blasted with entertainment,
adjusted with therapy and Prozac
"till you don't even want
to be free anymore.
Or if you can't be adjusted,
the psych ward."
"Or prison."
"The only alternative,
the only hope for us,
the only way to break free..."
"is to blow the whole thing up."
I'm ready.
Kaczynski, you ready?
Ted, as your attorney,
I'm begging you to reconsider this.
Do not go in there alone
with Fitzgerald.
It is unthinkably reckless
for the defendant in a capital case
to, A--
talk with the arresting agent,
and B--
do so without counsel present.
This is a huge risk for you.
And there's no reason to take it.
Let me come in there with you.
I'll stay out of the way,
just observe,
and be ready to step in.
I'll be in the next room
the whole time.
All you need to do
to end the interview
is to ask for me, okay?
We need
a guilty plea from Ted.
This is our only shot.
You're our only shot.
Right.
Give us a second.
We know Ted Kaczynski's
the Unabomber,
but we can't go to trial.
This case hangs on so many
different technicalities.
If we go before a jury,
if we roll that dice...
These are dangerous,
uncertain times.
Look at Waco. Look at O.J.
Even the Menendez brothers
hung their juries.
The Unabomber has an I.Q. of 168.
Think about that--168.
If Ted Kaczynski goes to trial,
he could walk.
If he walks, he disappears.
If he disappears,
he's back in action.
Only this time,
we'll never find him.
The guilty plea is the only way
to make sure that doesn't happen.
Listen, Fitz.
I think Ted asked for you because
he recognized a kindred spirit.
Play into that.
Make him feel smart,
understood, sympathized with.
Build a connection,
but stay opaque.
Don't give him too much.
He knows you as well
as you know him. Better.
He's gonna be probing you
for weaknesses all the time,
looking for anything
to go against us.
Get him talking,
build a connection,
then start to steer him
towards the guilty plea.
You're trying to help him,
trying to save him
from the electric chair.
You're his only friend,
but do it gently.
Don't spook him, okay?
Get him there.
Okay.
Agent Fitzgerald?
I am so glad to make
your acquaintance at last.
Ellie, on phone: When would be
a good time for you?
I already talked to Kim
about taking the days.
Nancy says she can cover for me,
and Mom would watch the boys.
So, just tell me when,
'cause I took it.
Good to hear it.
That's great.
Uh, why don't you just call me back
- when I won't be just talking to myself?
- Oh, no. No, no.
I'm here. I'm here.
I'm listening. I am.
It's just, you know...
you know...
What's going on with you?
I'm just gonna call you back.
Okay.
Okay, bye.
Um, that's for today.
Fitz. Right now.
Janet Reno, on speaker:
Well, we've looked at the FAA reports,
LAPD
and, uh, airport briefings,
read the material
S.A.C. Ackerman sent.
Based on what we've seen, uh,
A.G.'s office is good to sign off
on reopening LAX.
- How about you, Bill?
- FAA is good with that.
FBI Director Freeh here.
I'll confirm that from our end
and give the green light
to flight control.
Flight control,
I see the green light here,
good to reopen runways.
First plane should be up
momentarily.
Flight control,
this is S.A.C. Ackerman,
permission to stay on the line?
Affirmative, Agent.
The Unabom device that almost
blew up American Airlines 444
was triggered by an altimeter
set to blow up at 20,000 feet.
American flight 7 is airborne.
United 732 airborne.
TWA one-niner-niner airborne.
This is American flight 7.
We are climbing to 15,000 feet.
Climbing to 20,000.
Checked in uniform, 7.
We're approaching 10,000.
KLM 206, we're climbing now.
- KLM 206, cruising altitude, over.
- Approaching cruising altitude.
American flight 7,
we're at 25,000,
- reaching cruising altitude now.
- Approaching cruising altitude, over.
All clear. All clear.
You hear that, Agent?
Loud and clear.
Thank God.
You made the right call.
I shouldn't have made any call.
All those people on the plane,
and it was based on what,
on some letters?
It was the right call.
You really think you can get
something good out of this manifesto,
something worthwhile?
Yeah.
Yeah, I think I can.
Okay. I'm giving you an office.
And a team, if you want it.
Maybe you'll even read
the manifesto now.
I will. We all will.
Actually, I already tried to read it.
Oh, no, I did.
But, come on, end notes
and all these dead sentences.
Who writes like this?
Fitz?
When I say "wudder,"
you learn everything about me.
One tiny word, one tiny mistake,
and you can tell I'm from Philly,
blue-collar, local school,
fan of Dave Schultz.
Just like when you say "bruh,"
it could only be from
San Francisco, right?
What if there's a "wudder" or a "bruh"
in here, in the manifesto?
I mean, how do we even
start to look for that?
I don't know.
Read it again.
Oh, boy.
Get some coffee on then, bruh.
Agent Fitzgerald.
Long way from Montana.
Oh, yeah, well,
most people carry their cage
with them wherever they go.
At least if I remain
disgusted by this place,
I know I'm still alive.
Still free in here.
So why me?
Why you? You wrote the document
that put me in here.
Your linguistic analysis
of the manifesto
got them the search warrant,
the search warrant
got them the evidence--
The document that
put you in here, you wrote.
I am becoming very well-acquainted
with your work.
It is the product
of great imagination.
What I really appreciate about you
is that most people take language
for granted, but not you.
You saw it differently,
and that is the first step
toward becoming free--
a shift in perspective.
Manifesto, for instance.
I never liked that moniker.
It makes it sound like
an unconsidered rant,
and you and I both appreciate
the power and specificity of words.
Manifesto versus article,
insanity versus enlightenment,
mental breakdown versus
on extended leave from active duty.
You have had a change
of life circumstance,
since your work on
the Unabom case, am I wrong?
Yeah, I have.
Because of what I allegedly wrote?
- Yeah.
- What was it?
Just between us.
When did it all click?
No?
Well, for me, uh,
it all began in Chicago.
One day, this mockingbird began
singing in the backyard there,
you know, that puffed-up confidence,
just belting out his song,
and...I began to realize
that the mockingbird
is singing the car alarm.
Ba-beep, ba-beep.
You know the one?
Rrr, rrr....
And I--I just sat there,
listening to that poor, dumb bird
for maybe an hour straight, thinking,
"What have we done?"
How wrong that was,
and it stuck with me.
I kept coming back to it,
just trying to figure out
where in the world
we had gone so wrong
that it had ended up here.
For me, it was the part about driving.
Every time I got in the car,
I thought about it.
The more I drove,
the more it made sense.
Like, there was this one night
I was driving home from work,
and there was nobody on the street--
I mean, nobody.
And I'm sitting at a red light,
just waiting, waiting.
And there's no cars anywhere.
But, still, I sat there.
I obeyed.
That's when I realized
it's not about technology,
it's not about machines.
It's about what they're doing to us.
It's about what they're doing to us,
what they do to our hearts,
'cause our hearts
are no longer free.
- And you wanted to be free.
- Right.
You wanted your human dignity,
your autonomy.
- Yeah. But --
- Everybody wants that.
People want it so badly,
they're dying by the thousands every day,
just trying to salvage
some of their humanity.
- Okay--
- Think about this:
More people have died from suicide
in just the time we've been talking
than I allegedly killed
in my entire career.
More people died
from anti-depressants,
plastic surgery, fast-food.
Why--w-why is everybody
so terrified of me?
And ask yourself this question:
Why are these men in suits
so desperate to prove that I'm crazy?
I will tell you.
It's because they know that I'm right.
I'm awake.
- They're asleep.
- Yeah.
And they're terrified they might
have to wake up, too,
and turn off their cellphones
and their TVs
and their video games
and face themselves
the way that you and I have.
You and I?
You and I.
Ted, I came here 'cause
I believe in what you wrote.
Good.
I think you asked me here
'cause you need an ally
to help save your life,
so you can spread your message
and change things.
Really change things. Right?
Right.
Now, I've gone through all your options.
I think a guilty plea--
No.
And he was doing so well.
I can talk about my options
with any one of these Barbary apes
watching through the cameras.
But I chose you
because I thought you were different.
Next time,
you might bring me some
writing paper and some stamps.
They're so stingy in here,
and I have so much
correspondence.
It's really quite overwhelming.
Thank you.